Despite nearly 97,000 layoffs since the beginning of 2022 by big-name
companies like Alphabet, Amazon, Meta and Microsoft, the programming
industry is still set to add more than 411,000 new software developer
jobs by 2031, according to the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics.
In our modern world, it's safe to say that programming is here to stay
and that there has never been a better time to start learning. Let's
explore four of the most beginner-friendly programming languages in
2023.

### Scratch

Scratch is a platform created by MIT in 2003 which provides users with a
set of "drag 'n' drop" blocks which combine together to form the same
common logical structures found in many programming languages. Users can
build games or interactive animations using Scratch's pre-made set of
"sprites" or illustrated characters or design their own to use.

Though it is designed for younger users, Scratch is fantastic for users
of all ages to start developing the thought process that will be
essential for moving forward in programming.

### Lua

Lua is a scripting language which has gained popularity in recent years
due its ability to allow users to build features for games like Roblox
and World of Warcraft. As a scripting language, it is rarely used a
standalone programming language, but it allows users to practice with
programming with very little overhead or setup.

Many companies like Adobe, web server technologies like Apache, and
open-source programs on Linux are supported by Lua scripting, making it
a great choice for beginners who want to dive into more practical
applications for coding logic.

### Python

When considering full-featured, professional programming languages that
are easy to learn, look no farther than Python. Students are initially
attracted to its simple syntax and their appreciation grows as they
discover its ability to perform most of the same tasks as its more
complicated predecessors like C and C++.

With uses in web development, data science, scripting, robotics,
artificial intelligence and even in building desktop applications, it
was voted the fourth most-used, sixth most-loved and the number one
most-wanted language in Stack Overflow's Developer Survey in 2022.

### JavaScript

JavaScript was originally invented to improve users' experience on
websites by adding more interactivity and animation. It is currently the
most-used programming language in the world for professional developers
and anyone that hopes to find a career in web development is guaranteed
to work with it in some capacity.

JavaScript does have a steeper learning curve than some other languages
and, since its designed to run in a web browser, other technologies like
HTML and CSS are essential in order to use it to its fullest potential.
It's being mentioned here because of its ubiquity, though modern
JavaScript can be applied in most the same types of applications as
Python.

No matter which programming language one chooses to learn, much of what
they learn will be able to be applied to other languages in the future.
However, the four aforementioned languages will help beginners build a
solid foundation to build on as they learn to write code.
