The state of Oregon has seen an increase in their homeless population every
year since 2010^[1]^. As the number of people in this marginalized demographic
grows, so to does the public's animosity toward them. Business owners claim
they "scare away customers". Worried parents are wary about their kids having
to pass by a group of tents and piles of garbage on their way to school in
their otherwise middle-class home. While these concerns are valid from a
particular point of view, is it appropriate to blame the people experiencing
homelessness? Is it possible that the anger and outrage might be displaced?
It's difficult sometimes for those who are lucky enough to have the ability to
make ends meet to empathize with those to whom that privilege isn't available, 
so let's explore some of the root causes of homelessness in Oregon.

Houseless individuals are often stigmatized as lazy, drug-addicted, mentally
ill or sometimes all three. This definitely makes it easier to direct anger at
them, but do all homeless folks fall into these categories? Due in part to
Oregon's 2020 passing of Measure 110, which decriminalized the minor possession
of drugs in hopes of arresting fewer people annually^[2]^, 60% of the 193 the
homeless people who died in Multnomah County 2021 involved illicit
substances^[3]^. However, according to Portland's 2022 Point In Time report, of
the roughly eighteen-hundred unsheltered individuals polled, 83% percent of
them was afflicted by one or more disabling conditions and just over a third
suffered from three or more^[4]^. In contrast, just over a third suffered from
either substance abuse or mental health disorders.

The report concluded that the main cause of the nearly 30% increase in the
homeless population between 2019 and 2022 was COVID-19. Just over 25% of
respondents cited COVID-19 as a reason they were living outside instead of in
shelters or transitional housing. Considering that mortality rates for homeless
populations were between 0.3% and 1.9% higher than average^[5]^, it's plain to
see that the pandemic had a compounding effect on the number of people
experiencing homelessness in recent years. 

So why don't homeless folks just get a job, work hard and find themselves a
cheap place to rent? The truth is, for many, that's a goal that is well out of
reach. According to the non-profit, Housing Oregon, there are nearly 250,000
families in Oregon who make less than $33,000 a year and need affordable
housing, yet there are only 143,000 units available for them^[6]^. These are
families that already have jobs and are working hard to make ends meet. While
legislation has been passed in Oregon to cap rent increases, the average cost
to rent an apartment in Portland has increased 64% since 2006^[7]^. New
developments are in constant construction, but many buildings only reserve a
small portion for affordable housing, prioritizing units that can make more
money.

While it's reasonable to want to protect one's family and community, expressing
anger toward homeless people is probably not the best use of energy. The
vitriol that has befallen those less-fortunate individuals only makes it harder
for them to find stable footing in society, especially given the odds that are
  stacked against them. Access to affordable housing as well as mental health
  and addiction services is essential for the situation to turn around in an
  effective way.
