The process for mastering a new skill is a nebulous concept which is unique for
every individual. There's a reason most will liken it to a journey or a quest.
However, the core set of emotions that the process evokes is more common than
one might think and there are some philosophies that, if taken as mantra, can
help in dealing with the inevitable self-doubt one will encounter on the road
to success.

**"If you believe you can, you can. If you believe you cannot, you cannot."**
In his 1985 book, "Outliers: The Story of Success," author Malcolm Gladwell
asserts that the key to achieving expertise in any skill is to practice
correctly for at least 10,000 hours. If one believes that they won't be able to
do something, then it will be impossible to muster the requisite
self-discipline to achieve this goal. Learning brings with it a range of
self-deprecating emotions that need to be faced in order to persevere toward
mastery. As acclaimed artist, Bob Ross, once said, "Talent is pursued
interest. Anything you practice you can do."

**"Fail as fast as quickly as possible."** The road to success is paved in
mistakes. Be bold, dive in and take note of how not to do things along the way.
Use errors as blueprints to make improvements.

**"Not perfect, but good enough."** No one will judge more harshly than oneself
and if perfection is the goal, self-criticism is never in short supply. In
practice, most of what one creates will be far from perfect and it's important
to take pride in even the smallest of accomplishments to not allow negative
self-perception to creep in.

**"Comparison is the death of joy."** No matter what level of proficiency one
might have in a particular area, it's always possible to feel inadequate in
comparison to one's peers. If progress is judged in relation to the
achievements of others, satisfaction will never be found in a new skill.
Everyone's experience is unique and so too is their self-expression.

**"Maintain a beginner\'s mind."** Mastering a new skill is a lifelong
endeavor. If someone believes they have learned all there is to know about a
subject, then the journey is over. As one gains knowledge, it's important to
keep that knowledge in perspective and to proceed with humility. Even the most
skillful people in the world feel like beginners sometimes. This might seem
discouraging, but knowing everything leaves no room for improvement.

While a skill might seem to come more naturally to one person than another,
their innate ability won't become true talent without diligent practice and
continued pursuit of improvement. Human beings are multi-faceted creatures,
capable of amazing feats of knowledge and creativity. The only obstacle to our
own greatness is ourselves.
