- climate
  - cycling has the lowest environmental impact of any mode of transportation, including walking
  - highest environmental impact of biking comes from food production
  - ebikes are even more efficient
  - electric vehicles can help reduce climate impact, since they emit less carbon that traditional vehicles
  - biking alone plays little role in climate impact because its limited to short distances
  - trains and buses are more efficient than cars


In our modern world, most people consider paved roads to be the natural habitat
of cars and trucks and looking at most major cities in the world, they would be
correct. However, this was not always the case. In fact, it was cyclists in the
late 1880s that pushed for the improvement of roads for the sake of safer
biking which eventually paved the way for the proliferation of motorized
vehicles in the early 1900s^1^. The history of bike-centric roads was further
erased from the annals of time by the automotive industry when automotive
companies like Ford started releasing promotional materials claiming that the
Model T "started the movement for good roads everywhere." What would the world
be like if bikes had continued to be the primary mode of transportation? Let's
explore a few ways bikes size up to cars.

One of the biggest advantages of motorized vehicles is the convenience of being
able to travel long distances in relative comfort. Cars have roofs, windows,
shock-absorbing mechanisms, heating and air-conditioning and they take very
little physical exertion to operate. They are also capable of carrying heavy
loads from one place to another and are much faster in emergency situations or
if one needs to seek medical attention. Though bicycles definitely pale in
  comparison in these categories, they offer a number of appealing benefits
  that cars lack when it comes to average, daily use. 

One of the most appealing aspects of bike transportation is the cost. According
to the 2022 AAA Driving Costs Fact Sheet^2^, the average yearly cost of owning
and operating a car is upwards of $10,000. This includes the price of fuel,
insurance premiums, maintenance, licensing, registration, and other associated
costs. The average price of commuting by bike is around $350^3^, a 96.5%
reduction. The price of the average new car in the United States just hit a
record high in 2022 of just over $49,000^4^. In contrast, the average new
bicycle has a $1,500 - $2,500 price tag, another reduction of around 95%. Even
high-end bike models, including electric bicycles top out around $6,000, so
when considering the cost of a vehicle, bicycles beat cars hands-down. 

One downside to biking is having to contend with cars on the road and, as a
result, being subjected to air-borne air pollutants from the road. However,
studies show that cyclists actually experience less cumulative exposure to air
pollution than those in cars and even pedestrians during similar commutes^5^.
Regular aerobic exercise has been shown to lower resting blood pressure levels
in sedentary older adults^6^ and one 2010 study^7^ found a correlation between
the amount an employee commuted to work and a decrease in the number of sick
days they claimed annually. Exercise also has a profound impact on mental
health, offering at least a three-fold decrease in symptoms of depression in
college-aged students compared to students who didn't exercise regularly^8^.


The perks of cars are myriad, but aren't many of the problems they solve also
due to the infrastructure needed to operate them? Because they're able to
travel long distances quickly, cities are designed in a way that necessitates
their use. Commercial centers are grouped together, away from residential
areas. Grocery stores are few and far between, requiring a car to carry larger
amounts of groceries. Suburbs pop up on the outskirts of larger urban areas,
forcing their residents to make long commutes.



Environmentla impact of cycling
https://www.bikeradar.com/features/long-reads/cycling-environmental-impact/

