Keegan Michael Good

Isn't it funny how one's name sets the stage for all of the things they
will experience in their life? A small series of phonemes dictates so
much of how we perceive the world and how others perceive us.

"Keegan" is Gaelic in origin and is said to mean "firey". Ironically, my
family is not Gaelic, but more Germanic or Anglo Saxon. The names of
"Michael" and "Good" hit that nail more squarely on the head.

My mother chose the name "Keegan" from a book of baby names. She never
really gave me much of a reason other than that she "just liked it". She
wanted my name to begin with a "K" and if I were a girl would have named
me Kenzie. Either way, six letters, two syllables.

I'm not sure why "Michael" was chosen as my middle name, though I have
an uncle on my father's side who shares it. He's a kind man and has
always checked up on me even though we live far away. It's a name that,
falling victim to commonality, fades quietly into obscurity - at best
abbreviated as a single initial "M" on a bureaucratic form and at worst
omitted entirely. No offense to all the Mikes out there.

The name of "Good" has undoubtedly shaped the course of my life. How
could having an adjective as a moniker have any other effect? As far as
adjectives go, though, I think I lucked out. I suppose it could be
"Better" or "Best", but then what would I strive for? What room for
improvement would there be? It could have been "Boring" or "Snide",
"Bland" or "Crass". How differently things might have played out if that
were the case. But no, I am a "Good".

My name has grown on me, or maybe I've grown into it, it's hard to say.
I have evolved into a strong communicator who isn't afraid to wield my
fire in defense of the good in this world. With kindness as the spark
and compassion as the fuel, the controlled burn that is Keegan Michael
Good will continue to protect the forests and pastures. A candle burns
brightest in the dark.
