The Mayor of Portland was sitting in his office, surrounded by his work which
was piled high on either side of him. His attire was far from business formal,
his wiry, disheveled hair escaping from beneath a gray, knit cap. He was
mumbling to himself about this and that, frantically trying to piece together
the intricate web of conspiracy that had overrun the city. 

"Landmines in Peninsula Park...melt down the bottles for Kevlar...1, 2, 3
pigeon feathers..." 

He reached into the pocket of his musty, dusty coat and retrieved a mixed
handful of coins, small stones, a paperclip and a small bronze statue of Shiva.
With the thumb and index finger of his opposite hand, he carefully placed the
statue of Shiva on a 4"x6" replica of an ornamental rug which was already
adorned with bits of bone, a polished cut of agate tarnished with tiny
scratches and a piece of tree bark with a small patch of moss on it. Then, with
the same intentional movement of his thumb and forefinger, he placed everything
but the coins back into his pocket.

One by one he counted the coins, organizing them into small stacks based on
denomination.

"Thirty-five ... fourty ... sixty-five miles to freedom. Seventy-five ...
eighty-five ... rain on the plain who can complain? ..."

He paused, got to his feet and started digging through a neon pink fanny pack
strapped to a toaster in the front of his shopping cart overflowing with life.
He unzipped the front pocket and retrieved two slips of paper. After analyzing
them, he resumed counting the remainder of the coins.

An affluent-looking man on his way to the grocery store on the corner
approached the alcove between buildings where the Mayor's office was located.
The Mayor bowed deeply and greeted the man with a smile, "Welcome to City Hall!
Would you be able to..." The man sped up his pace, suddenly fascinated by his
own shoes. Unfazed, the Mayor returned to mandala of hidden truth which
undulated between chaos and divine clarity in his head.

A group of two women passed the Mayor's office en route to the coffee shop on
the next block. He was frozen, mouth agape, in pensive thought, contemplating
the vast, interconnected everything. The women exchanged a look of mild
disgust, catching a waft of his unwashed loins and hurried away before the
guilt of their privileged life could ruin their plans. The Mayor realized their
presence a moment too late and called after them, "Beg yer pardon!" Though
clearly still within earshot, they did not acknowledge him.

With a shrug he retrieved a pen and a small notebook from his breast pocket.
Flipping past pages and pages of illegible secrets of the universe until his
found a blank section, he scrawled, "Ancient satellites in the bus circuits."
He circled the words and shoved the notebook back in his pocket.

A young man was crossing the street and waved hello to the Mayor, who he'd
spoken with on multiple occasions. The mayor bent down and scooped the coins he
had counted earlier and with striking lucidity, asked the man, "Please, can you
do me a favor?"

The young man asked how he could help and the Mayor responded, "They won't let
me in the grocery store anymore...could you pick me up some bread and
margarine?" He pointed toward the store on the corner and proffered the stacks
of coins and the slips of paper from the fanny pack which turned out to be
coupons for bread and margarine. "I finally have just enough money!"

Moved by compassion for the childlike innocence of this man whom society had
failed so miserably, the young man replied, "Of course I can do that for you.
You can keep your money. I'll use my food stamps" How could he deny such a
simple plea for human decency? "What's your name, my friend?"

The Mayor looked at the boy with a puzzled smirk on his face, "I'm the Mayor of
Portland! Don't you recognize me from the news?"

"I knew I'd seen you somewhere before," the young man replied. "Wait here,
Mayor, I'll be right back."

He walked to the grocery store and purchased two loaves of bread and a
container of margarine. With a light heart and a pep in his step he swiped his
food stamp card and exited the automatic doors to deliver the payload. As he
turned the corner toward City Hall, he was stopped by a police officer. "Whoa,
kid. No street's closed. Crime scene."

"Oh, okay," the young man replied. "These groceries belong to the man who was
sitting in that alcove right over there. Did you see which way he went?"

The officer motioned backward with his thumb to the long black bag lying on the
ground. "Drive by. Prollie a gang initiation."

