---
indent: true
---
"Your father isn't going to be living with us anymore," my mother said
as she, my father, my brother, Elliott, and I sat around the kitchen
table for the last time as a family.

> "Why?" I asked, my twelve-year-old brow learning the true meaning of
> "furrowed".
>
> "Sometimes people just fall out of love," she replied.

It was the only time I had ever seen my father cry and it was the moment
when my childhood was lost to the annals of time. Chronologically, I had
not yet reached adulthood, but that day my brother and I were left to
fend for ourselves so our mother could live out some kind of unrequited
youth.

My father, fourteen years my mother's senior, was well into his thirties
when I was born, whereas my mother was twenty-four. He provided her with
a sense of security and she was his beautiful, young bride. I think they
would both claim that they were in love at one point, but I don't think
I ever really experienced that side of their relationship. My father
worked long hours away from home and my mother was in nursing school in
most of the memories I have before the divorce. Sure, they would have
friends over to drink beers or celebrate the holidays. They'd crack
jokes and laugh, but I don't recall them ever being truly affectionate
toward one another. They "loved" each other, but didn't really seem as
though they liked each other.

After they split, my father spent ten years in a melancholy stupor,
hobbled by the sudden loss of his family and struggling to bounce back
financially because he gave everything to his ex-wife. My mother almost
immediately started dating again and would spend most of her free time
away from the house on a quest for the man who would spend the most
money on her.

My brother and I were left to raise each other and when we were old
enough, we got an apartment together so we could wash our hands of the
whole thing. Neither of our parents checked in on us that much. Our
mother would help us with the rent now and again, but in her eyes, we
were doing well because we weren't emotionally dependent on her and she
could focus on living "her life".

My brother and I found refuge in psilocybin, THC, LSD and anything else
that evoked the slightest bit of magic and self-transcendence. We
huddled around the words of Alan Watts, Aldous Huxley, Baba Ram Dass and
Lao Tzu, scrawling chicken-scratch notes in endless notebooks like we'd
been handed the meaning of life itself. We wiped our harddrives clean
and reinstalled our operating system so many times that the sun became
our father and the moon became our mother. We were born anew as the best
of friends - true brothers. If the blood of the covenant is thicker than
the water of the womb, we were a blood-water cocktail, shaken not
stirred.

The psychic weight of suburban, midwestern living weighed heavily on us
and this led our minds to wonder if there wasn't something greener over
the proverbial fence. We sold our belongings until we could fit our
lives in backpacks, purchased a burgundy Chevy Astro conversion van,
ripped out the seats and headed west until we reached the Elysian peaks
of Wy\'east, or as the sightless colonizers that came before us call it,
Mt. Hood. We found freedom in the ancient cedars, compassion in the
coastal waves and peace in the ubiquitous mycelial presence that
connects it all behind the loamy veil.

My parents are just people now. I am grateful for their biological
contribution to my life, but even though they're still alive, they are
like a distant memory. They're like a holiday card from a distant
relative containing a blithe message and a five-dollar bill.

I still grieve the demise of our family unit from time to time. I can't
help but think what it would have been like if they chose to let love
persevere and not take themselves so seriously. If they had been able to
get out of their own way, we could have had something incredibly
beautiful together - a family. It's at those moments that I shrug, look
up at the moon reflecting the sun's rays and relish in how amazing it is
to be alive.
