As a human being, one might, at some point, find oneself wont for a
deeper meaning, an overarching purpose to existence. It's all too easy
to get swept up in the mundane rigamarole of daily life and to feel as
though one is caught on an automatic conveyor belt from the maternity
ward to the crematorium with very few detours along the way. Add to this
the tendency for the human mind to regret the past and worry about the
future and life can be cast in a rather bleak light. So, what's to be
done about this feeling? Is there a way to spin this outlook into
something more tenable or even something that could evoke joy? Herman
Hesse's *Siddhartha* explores this topic in depth, using Siddhartha's
life to illustrate one young man's journey for freedom from the self.

Siddhartha's struggle is one of paradoxes. Even as a young person, he is
bereft with the feeling that, despite his prowess as a Brahmin, he still
feels the need to seek satisfaction elsewhere. Hesse says of Siddhartha,
"He lived a good life, his words were wise; fine and noble thoughts
dwelt in his head -- but even as he who knew so much, did he live in
bliss, was he at peace? Was he not also a seeker, insatiable?" (Hesse.
7) The realization of the underlying dichotomy that plagues Siddhartha
ultimately leads him to forego his comfortable life and to lean into his
seeking.

He chooses to leave the village and to join a group of nomadic Samanas
in hopes that he will be able to free himself of the prison of desire
and to find enlightenment through negation. He spends a handful of years
living in self-denial, going to great lengths to starve the self of its
desires in order to liberate himself from them. He sees the world of
illusions in everything around him, from businessmen to decaying animals
on the riverside and as he fasts he develops a fervent contempt for the
game of life. "Siddhartha had one single goal -- to become empty, to
become empty of thirst, desire, dreams, pleasure and sorrow -- to let
the Self die." (Hesse. 14)

However, though his practice as a Samana taught him many ways to empty
the self, no matter how hard he tried, all paths seemed to lead back to
the self. This epiphany brings about the next major paradox in
Siddhartha's journey. He asks of his friend Govinda, "What is
meditation? What is abandonment of the body? What is fasting? What is
holding of the breath? It is a flight from the Self, it is a temporary
escape from the torment of Self." (Hesse. 17)With this realization,
Siddhartha outgrows the Samanas. The knowledge they seemed to possess
when he joined the group has transformed into another flavor of the
illusion of the Self that he is seeking to escape. He continues to
Govinda, "I believe that amongst the Samanas, probably not even one will
attain Nirvana. We find consolations, we learn tricks with which we
deceive ourselves, but the essential thing -- the way -- we do not
find." (Hesse. 18)

Siddhartha and Govinda hear rumors about a man named Gotama who is told
to have achieved enlightenment by "conquering in himself the sorrows of
the world and had brought to a standstill the cycle of rebirth." (Hesse.
20) Siddhartha abandons the Samanas and decides to search for Gotama in
order to attain this knowledge for himself. Upon seeing Gotama for the
first time, Siddhartha recognizes him immediately as the Buddha and
points him out to Govinda from a distance. "With a secret smile, not
unlike that of a healthy child, he walked along, peacefully,
quietly...every finger of his hand spoke of peace, spoke of
completeness, sought nothing, imitated nothing, reflected a continuous
quiet, an unfading light, an invulnerable peace" (Hesse. 27-28). Despite
Siddhartha's own desire for such unwavering inner peace, he quickly
realizes that the Buddha has nothing to teach him. After all, it isn't
knowledge, but rather the experience of freedom of the self that
Siddhartha is seeking.

This transition triggers the next phase of Siddhartha's life. Having
left home to seek knowledge, he has now given up the idea of seeking
knowledge entirely. The external world, which he once cast aside as a
nothing but ornate and temptuous illusions, is now abuzz with
information that cannot be learned, but can only be experienced. He is
awakened to the beauty of the physical world that he had so long tried
to deny himself. This new revelation throws Siddhartha headlong into
paradox when he meets the lovely Kamala, for whom he is immediately
smitten. While Siddhartha started his journey in order to free himself
of desire, he has found himself with a fervent desire to play into
Samsara, the game of ordinary human life.

Siddhartha is becomes very successful at the game, but as his wealth and
prosperity grow, so too does his dissatisfaction to the point where he
considers suicide in order to escape the gluttony and greed which have
replaced his curiosity and wonderment. About this time in Siddhartha's
life, New York Times contributor, Adam Kirsch says, "Siddhartha refers
to the normal human beings around him as "the child people"---and full
of self-contempt. No wonder he is much given to thoughts of suicide,
whether or not he actually commits it." (Kirsch). It would seem that
Siddhartha's background in spiritual learning has actually been the most
prominent obstacle in his quest for inner peace.

Rather than commit suicide, Siddhartha, abandoning his material
possessions and life in the city, experiences a more metaphorical death.
"His was full of ennui, full of misery, full of death; there was nothing
left in the world that could attract him, that could bring him pleasure
or solace." (Hesse. 87) With this feeling, Siddhartha collapses beside a
tree and falls asleep, wishing for death to free him from his suffering.
It is in this moment that he recalls the spiritual learning from his
youth and "when the sound of Om reached Siddhartha's ears, his
slumbering soul suddenly awakened and he recognized the folly in his
actions." (Hesse. 89)

Siddhartha returns to a river he crossed many years ago in order to
reunite with the ferryman, Vasudeva, who was kind enough to let him stay
in his riverside cabin just after he had parted ways with Govinda and
Gotama. He joins the ferryman as his apprentice and spends his time
listening intently to the sounds of the river in which he hears the
voices of everyone he has ever known. He discovers that "when he did not
bind his soul to any one in particular and absorb it in his Self, but
heard them all, the whole, the unity; then the great song of a thousand
voices consisted of one word: Om -- perfection." (Hesse. 136) It is in
this singular word that Siddhartha, despite all of his personal
suffering, finally attains the peace he has been seeking his entire
life. He realizes the underlying truth of reality, that everything is
united, everything is a continuum of which the individual makes only a
part. He discovers that the self he had been looking to diminish was the
"self" with a lowercase "s" and once he was able to step out of his own
way, the "Self" with an uppercase "S", the eternal song of the river,
the pure liberation of Nirvana, was with him the whole time.

Columnist Paul W. Morris claims "*Siddhartha* addresses a perennial
unrest and provides a new set of values for a generation of young people
disenchanted with their parents' conservatism," (Morris) but to diminish
the potency of the story by attributing it to some kind of rebellious
fugue of youth overshadows the deeper meaning to which Siddhartha's
experiences can expose the reader. It's easy for most people to
empathize with Siddharta's stuggles and while the author's use of
"Sanskrit words such as 'Brahmin,' 'Samana,' and "Atman'\' make\[s\] the
story more immersive and help\[s\] to remind the reader of the story's
setting \[and\] most western readers ... \[won't be\] familiar with
these words and \[will\] have to rely on the context to decipher the
meanings," (Wilber) Hesse opens innumerable opportunities for readers to
further explore these topics. Siddhartha's life shines a spotlight on
the nature of human suffering and provides the succinct and powerful
symbolism that is required to spark the spontaneous realization of joy
that is necessary to find fulfillment in life.

**Works Cited**

> Kirsch, Adam. "Hermann Hesse\'s Arrested Development." *The New
> Yorker*, 12 Nov. 2018,
> [[https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/11/19/hermann-hesses-arrested-development]{.underline}](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/11/19/hermann-hesses-arrested-development).
> Accessed 15 March 2023.
>
> Morris, Paul W. "Siddhartha." *Tricycle*, 7 Feb. 2016,
> [[https://tricycle.org/magazine/siddhartha/]{.underline}](https://tricycle.org/magazine/siddhartha/).
> Accessed 15 March 2023.
>
> Wilber, Jennifer. "An Analysis, Critique, and Comparison of
> 'Siddhartha' by Hermann Hesse \..." *Owlcation*, 5 July 2022,
> [[https://owlcation.com/humanities/An-Analysis-Critique-and-Comparison-of-Siddhartha-by-Hermann-Hesse-and-Lilith-A-Metamorphosis-by-Dagmar-Nick]{.underline}](https://owlcation.com/humanities/An-Analysis-Critique-and-Comparison-of-Siddhartha-by-Hermann-Hesse-and-Lilith-A-Metamorphosis-by-Dagmar-Nick).
> Accessed 15 March 2023.
