Most people consider paved roads to be the natural habitat of cars and trucks
and looking at most major cities in the world, they would be correct. However,
this was not always the case. In fact, it was cyclists in the late 1880s that
pushed for the improvement of roads for the sake of safer biking which
eventually paved the way for the proliferation of motorized vehicles in the
early 1900s^1^. What would the world be like if bikes had continued to be the
primary mode of transportation? Let's explore a few ways bikes size up to cars.

One of the most appealing aspects of bike transportation is the cost. According
to the 2022 AAA Driving Costs Fact Sheet^2^, the average yearly cost of owning
and operating a car is upwards of $10,000. This includes the price of fuel,
insurance premiums, maintenance, registration, and other associated costs. The
average annual price of commuting by bike is around $350^3^, a 96.5% reduction.
The price of the average new car in the United States just hit a record high in
2022 of just over $49,000^4^. In contrast, the average new bicycle has a $1,500
- $2,500 price tag, another reduction of around 95%. Even high-end bike models,
  including electric bicycles top out around $6,000, so when considering the
  cost of a vehicle, bicycles beat cars hands-down. 

One of the biggest advantages of motorized vehicles is the convenience. Cars
have roofs, windows, heating and air-conditioning. They can carry heavy loads
from one place to another and are much faster in emergency situations. These
conveniences, however, often come at the cost of the operator's health. The
average American spends close to sixteen days behind the wheel of a car each
year^5^, which is a lot of time that could be spent exercising. Regular aerobic
exercise has been shown to lower resting blood pressure levels in sedentary
older adults^7^ and one 2010 study^8^ found a correlation between the amount an
employee commuted to work and a decrease in the number of sick days they
claimed annually. Exercise also has a profound impact on mental health,
offering at least a three-fold decrease in symptoms of depression in
college-aged students compared to students who didn't exercise regularly^9^.

It's true that bicycles have to contend with cars on the road and, as a result,
their riders are subjected to air-borne pollutants from their exhaust. However,
studies show that cyclists actually experience less cumulative exposure to air
pollution than those in cars and even pedestrians during similar commutes^5^,
so the health benefits of biking outweigh the risks in that case.

Cars are a convenient way to get from point A to point B, especially for folks
in rural areas, but for city drivers, choosing to bike a few days a week would
benefit their mental and physical well-being. Biking is cheap, fun and can
accomplish most of the same tasks as a car can with the right gear and a little
preparation. So let's get out there and share the road!
